Good afternoon and
welcome to session 428,
Understanding the
New Ink API on Mac OS X.
We are thrilled today to introduce
a new set of APIs on Mac OS X that
will allow you to provide
additional support for handwriting
recognition in your application.
As you know, with Jaguar,
Apple introduced Inkwell,
the end customer solution
for handwriting recognition.
Inkwell provides system-wide support for
Cocoa and Carbon applications without
requiring any modification to the apps.
And what I'd like to do first
today is give you a brief overview
of the functionality that Inkwell
supports in the applications.
here is a Wacom tablet, my Wacom tablet.
And I have downloaded the
Wacom driver from the web.
And the first thing I'm going to do,
is go to the system preference and
know that there's an ink panel there.
So I'm going to launch that panel.
And there is a control that is going to
allow me to turn recognition on and off.
Recognition is already on,
but if it went off, I turn it on.
And that's all basically all I need
to do to have system-wide support
for handwriting recognition in Java.
There's more stuff that you can
do in the Ink Preference Panel.
Basically,
tweak the settings for recognition.
Look at the gestures that we support.
Add words to your user dictionary.
But I'm not going to go
into those right now.
So let me quit the Ink Preference Panel.
And now I'm ready to start inputting
text in my Cocoa application.
I have text added up here.
And I'm going to start writing
anywhere I like on the screen.
And you'll see that the strokes and
the writing guidelines will show up.
The strokes get shipped as
a unit to the recognizer,
recognized as text,
sent to Cocoa as a Carbon event.
Cocoa will extract the information
and enter into the document.
I can continue to ride.
On this tablet,
strokes we build collected, recognized,
and boom, they go to my application.
As easy as that.
Text edits have not been
modified to support recognition.
However, Inkwell allows you to do much
more text than entering your text.
It also allows you to do editing.
So, for instance,
if I hold down the stylus,
the pen will go into mouse mode.
And now I have a selection.
I can act upon the selection and
I can erase it by just doing a
simple erase gesture on the screen.
And boom, that word is gone.
But I really didn't
want to erase that word.
I want it back in my
document and I'm going to...
do an undo gesture a shaky and new
gesture but there it is i got my word
back on this on the document so now let
me switch to a Carbon application and
i'm going to show you that exactly the
same paradigm works there i have itunes
and say that i bought a new cd and
i want to add it to my collection and
i want to give it a name i'm gonna pick
up my stylus and i'm gonna write the
name for my new cd there you go i'm done
so without any modification i can enter
text edit and manipulate the ui however
this is that's pretty powerful but there
is much more than really applications
could do if they had access to the
information that the recognition system
provides and to give you just a glimpse
of that i'm going to show you what the
ink pad does the ink pad is this little
input window that we ship on jaguar
that is accessible from the ink window
And that we like to call it the
first Ink Aware application.
So as you see, I can go to the Ink pad,
and now right there on the window, again,
the text, the ink is recognized and
will show up on the document.
However,
if I can go now to that same text,
and because this is an
Ink Aware application,
I can double click and hold,
and I can look at all of the
alternatives that the recognizing
the system has given us.
On top of that,
I can choose one of them if I like, or,
and I can look at the strokes
that they use that I've written
so that I get feedback on what
that word was meant to be.
So I can select that.
And now,
the case for the word has changed.
Okay.
Let me use the undo.
It works right there.
Okay, so I can continue to write on
the ink pad exactly the same
way that I wrote on TextEdit.
The phone ran,
and I stopped in the middle of the word,
where I can pick it up
right where I left it.
Like the other part of the cognition,
and then do a gesture to merge those two
pieces of those two words that I wrote.
So with a simple gesture that
looks very much like a V,
I can merge those two strings.
And now, notice that because this
is an InkAware application,
I can erase a word just by
scribbling on top of that without
having to go through the process
of selecting and then erasing.
So there is much more power that you
can add to your application by using
the stylus directly on the objects.
And developers have recognized that.
And since we introduced Inkwell,
we have had a series of requests
for developers to tap into the
Ink services that we provide.
And the requests have
ranged from questions like,
how can I add support for devices
other than the Wacom tablets,
to requests where developers are
asking about separating the process
of gathering the digital ink from
the process of recognizing the ink--
basically doing deferred recognition,
if you are familiar with the
term-- to questions about--
and other developers who want
to have more control on where
and when the ink is drawn.
So we have taken, for Panther,
we have taken those requests and
combined it with our vision on how
handwriting support should work
on Mac OS X to provide you with
a set of very simple yet powerful
APIs that would allow you to provide
additional support for handwriting.
They will allow you to ship to
your customers the solutions
that they are looking for.
So today,
what I want to do for the rest of the
presentation is introduce you to some
of the concepts that we are going
to use throughout the presentation,
some very basic concepts
that we use in the APIs.
And then we're going to talk
briefly about the technologies
that you use behind the scenes to
provide the recognition support.
And finally,
we're going to go into the meat
of the presentation and give you
a brief overview of the API we
support and how you can use them to
develop solutions for your customers.
One question that we often get is,
what kind of device do I need in order
to get Inkwell or Ink services to work?
And for Jaguar, the answer was,
you need a Wacom tablet
and a Wacom driver.
For Panther, we're going to continue,
of course, to support the Wacom devices,
but we are going to add support
for devices that provide
XY and pressure information,
either in a real-time fashion,
like tablets do, or in an offline way,
like the readily available
USB and Bluetooth pens that you
have these days on the market.
Now, let's go through the concept.
There are basically five concepts,
very simple concepts that we're
going to use throughout the
presentation and in the documentation.
The first one is an ink phrase,
and you are already familiar with that.
Think of an ink phrase as a group
of strokes that stays on the screen
before being shipped to the recognizer.
There are a little bit of
nuances to that concept that you
can read in the documentation,
but that basically is what you need
to think about for this presentation.
Now, as I was writing on the
tablet and I lifted the pen,
the ink phrase was terminated,
shipped to the recognizer,
and then to the application.
There are other ways that
I can terminate a phrase.
And basically, I can,
if I hold the pen for
a while and nothing,
and I don't do anything, anything else,
a timeout is going to happen and the
ink phrase is going to terminate.
The other way that ink phrases terminate
is because if I write my strokes apart on
the X direction and on the Y direction,
that's also a way that the
ink phrase is terminated.
And the reason why I'm telling you this,
what is an important concept to you,
is because later on when we go through
the developer scenarios and the APIs,
we're going to talk about ways for you
to take control over phrase termination
if your application needs to do so.
The next concept is Ink Text Ref.
And if the strokes you wrote are
recognized by the ink services as text,
essentially what you are going to get
The first tool you need to get in
your application is an ink text ref.
An ink text ref is an opaque object
that contains information about
the digital ink that you wrote,
the location of that ink,
and the information from the recognizer.
That set of strings that the recognizer
is provided as the alternate for the ink.
And the APIs provide a way for you to
access most of the information that
is available on the ink text ref.
The Alternates Menu.
If you want to present to your user
the results of the recognition so
that they can browse the information,
we're going to provide a simple
API for you to construct that
menu and show it to the user.
And the menu will contain, again,
the alternates plus the ink.
And the final concept that
I want to go over is gestures.
You saw me use all of
these gestures in the demo.
And so we basically have
three types of gestures.
The first kind, let me position myself,
on the right hand of the
screen is the undo gesture.
And we call those kind of
gestures non-targeted gestures.
And what those kind of gestures,
what it really means is no matter
where you draw them on the screen,
they're going to perform the same action.
The second type of gestures,
which I have here on the
top left of the screen,
are what we call optionally
targeted gestures.
And an example of that
is the erase gesture.
And you saw me use it in
two different contexts.
In text edit, which is at this point
not an InkAware app,
I had to do a selection
in order to erase.
In the InkPad,
which has been an InkAware application,
you can just erase on top of the text.
So that is the difference
for those gestures.
And we have additional gestures
that are optionally targeted.
And finally, the third class of gestures
is the joint gesture.
Those are gestures that are
only supported in InkAware apps
because we need to know where on
the screen that gesture occurs.
So there is no way for the
Ink services to differentiate between
a V or a joint gesture unless the
application gives us the information
or where on the context of the
application the gesture has occurred.
So again,
there are three classes of gestures,
and the reason why we're telling
you this is because you again can
choose to support those gestures
in your application to allow the
user to do direct manipulation,
to interact with the stylus directly
with the objects without requiring
them to go through the metaphor that is
needed for the keyboard where you have to
select and then act upon the selection.
You can just go and use the
stylus directly in the object.
And so the non-targeted gesture,
basically you don't
need to add the support.
The system can handle it.
For the optionally targeted gesture,
you may want to add the support
if you want that interaction to
happen because you need to add
the information of the location.
And for the always targeted gesture,
the support has to come
from the application.
And that concludes kind of the basic
concept that you need to know today.
Now let me move on to the ink components.
And we have basically four
components for the ink services.
On the right-hand side of the screen,
that blue rectangle shows
the application context.
And in the application context,
two of the components live there.
The ink input method is the part of
the ink services that provide data
collection and drawing of the ink.
So as you write,
the ink input method is going
to gather the data and draw it.
The other component on the context of
the application is the ink framework.
That's where the implementation
of the API lives.
On the left-hand corner of the screen,
the box shows you the user preferences,
which I show you in the demo.
And that contains the-- and then
contains the press pane that allows
users to set their recognition mode,
look at the gesture,
turn gestures on and off,
add words to their dictionary.
And finally,
on the top corner of the screen,
we have the ink server.
That's where the core of
the recognition lives,
where there's the segmentation,
the recognition process,
the language model is instantiated.
And in addition, the ink window.
But the important-- for you today
is the fact that that's where the
core of the recognition lives.
And with that, it is my pleasure to
introduce Larry Yeager.
Larry.
Larry is a distinguished
engineer at Apple.
He's worked for us for several
years in handwriting recognition,
and I'm very pleased to
have him on stage today.
Okay,
I'm going to give you a quick run through
some of the technologies underlying
what Giulia has just demonstrated
for you and even dive down a little
bit into the recognition technology,
though that doesn't
directly affect your apps.
It's sort of what provides
all these services.
The recognizer can be boiled
down to something very simple.
Basically,
these three boxes pretty much define
the last ten years of my life.
It starts off with X,
Y points and pen lifts,
just exactly what you would imagine
are coming from the graphics tablet.
And we take those in strokes,
what you normally think of as
strokes with pen and paper,
and we look at combinations
of those strokes to see what
might possibly be characters,
and that's what we call
character segmentation.
So out of this tentative
segmentation block comes these
character segmentation hypotheses,
and some of them are going to be right
and some of them are going to be wrong,
and we can't possibly
predict up front which.
The next block is a
neural network classifier.
It takes these combinations of
strokes that might be characters,
looks at them in a certain way,
and tries to decide
whether they are or not,
and which characters they are.
So what it emits are these
character class hypotheses.
It's trying to say if it's A, B, C, D, E,
F, or whatever.
That sequence of probability vectors
are fed into a search engine.
And the search engine sits
there with a language model,
that's the context,
and tries to just find the best
combination of all those possible
character combinations and vectors
of probabilities of characters and
look for the maximum likelihood path
through this graph and end up with,
finally, word probabilities,
what the person wrote.
So, sort of to see what that looks like,
suppose a person wrote
this on the computer.
You, you know,
hopefully maybe 50% of the people
in the audience thought it was
clog and 50% thought it was dog,
although dog's such a common word,
maybe a little skewed that way.
Well, what we do is take those strokes
and take the first stroke that
kind of looks like a C and feed it
into the neural network classifier.
It emits this vector of probabilities,
and let's say it's pretty good.
You know, 0.2.
90% certain that it's a C.
Okay, that's great.
Next, we'll probably try the
first two strokes together.
And let's say that, well, you know,
there's a written kind of far apart.
That's an awfully big gap in there.
Let's say the neural net kind
of picks up on that and says,
well, 70% probability that's a D.
And, you know,
a few other things scattered around.
When that second stroke
is then tried by itself,
the only legal transition
is from the C to the L.
You can't have the C and the
D because they use the same strokes.
So let's say that the neural net's
pretty good and it's got about an
80% probability that that's an L.
Well, I've deliberately jury-rigged
the numbers so that that looks
like 0.9 times 0.8 is 0.72.
So 72% chance that the
theory so far is CL.
72% chance that that's right.
Well, and I assigned 70% to the D.
So, so far,
our little engine thinks that it's
more likely to be CL than it is D.
Okay, well,
when the O stroke comes along,
let's say it's pretty good.
There's an interesting thing going
on here that it almost doesn't matter
what that probability is at this point.
The CLO is going to win over the
DO because the CL won over the D,
and that's going to be true
when we bring up the G.
You multiply those
probabilities together,
and indeed, ever so slightly the way
I've jury-rigged the numbers,
it would probably pick clog.
But in fact, as I mentioned earlier,
it's guided by context.
We have a language model that's fairly
complex that's guiding all this,
and you can write outside
of the dictionaries.
You don't have to write
in the dictionaries.
It's a loosely applied language model,
but it does guide the search.
And so if you were searching with
the pet philosophy news group
where the only words were cat,
dog, and dogma,
That would guide the search,
and so the only viable path through that
graph of the language model would be dog,
and so really dog would win.
And there's tons more information
actually published available on the web
that we'll give you a URL for later.
Okay, so given that the recognition
engine is sitting under there
ready to provide these answers,
let's take a look at how the data
flows through the system before
it gets to your application.
And again, you don't have to worry about
every little detail in here,
but hopefully this will give you
an idea enough about how things are
working that it'll make sense when
you do have to make calls to make
things happen just the way you want.
You'll understand why those
are the right things to do.
So initially, data comes in through
the graphics tablet.
That tablet data is fed into,
really this is kind of two
layers in this next block,
but I just lumped them together
to fit it on the slide gracefully.
There's a tablet driver
living at the IOHID layer,
and what it's really emitting is,
mouse events with tablet data in them.
So they really are true, honest to God,
first rate citizen mouse events,
but they also have this block of
data that has to do with pressure
and orientation of the pen and all
the special things that pens can do.
Okay.
Those mouse event plus tablidator are
fed through a core graphics layer,
of course.
And the core graphics layer does
something very special for us.
You may have noticed while
Giulia was demoing ink text
and some of the other things,
she did not have to write in
any of ink text's windows.
She could write off
apparently on the desktop.
We call that our write anywhere model.
And it's something the
user can turn on or off,
but we turn it on by default if you
turn ink on at all because it's deemed,
we call it a write anywhere model.
We think it's an easy way to interact
with the system when you're using a pen.
Basically, you write where you want to,
the recognition results
flow to the insertion point.
So core graphics is sitting there,
and if this mouse event coming
through the pipeline has tablet data
in it and recognition is enabled,
and we've told it that in the background,
then it will route those
events to the frontmost app.
That's going to be important
later because you might very well,
in the process of handling
ink-related events,
get points that lie out there.
So you can write outside your windows,
and you kind of need to know that.
Okay, so there's one other thing
that core graphics does for us.
If we're going to allow you
to write outside of windows
and write all over the screen,
well, there are some places where
you're going to put the pen,
the user is going to put the
pen down that they really want
it to just behave like a mouse.
When you put it down in the
drag region of a window,
you don't want to have it start writing
while you're trying to drag the window.
If you put it down in the scroll bar,
you don't want it to start writing while
you're trying to scroll the window.
And the dock is the same way.
So we've invented this idea
of instant mousing regions,
and so there are certain
special places that if the pen
lands in one of these regions,
it will instantly behave as
a mouse instead of inking.
And so core graphics has its own idea
of a few very special places like the
menu bar and the dock that are known,
and the draggable regions of windows
that are server-side dragged,
that it knows to go ahead
and treat instantly.
as a mouse.
Then we take-- so it finally still emits
just a mouse event with tablet data in.
And this is now we're getting into
your application context area.
But first, our input method,
our text services manager,
TSM input method,
gets a chance at the data first.
We have our own idea
about instant mousing.
And we take care of some things for you,
like most controls in the user interface
probably want to be instant mousers.
Well, we know about that.
So all your standard
Carbon and Cocoa controls are
automatically instant mousers,
except for the ones that--where we
think you ought to be able to write.
There's going to be a way
for you to manage your own
custom controls in a minute.
As Giulia said,
we gather that ink data up into strokes.
We add those strokes to the idea of
this current phrase and eventually
get around to terminating the phrase,
as Giulia said.
We send that off to the recognizer.
We get the results back.
And in Jaguar, we post,
first we post a unit code for key
event so that apps that are already
TSM savvy and looking for that can
get the whole block of text at once.
But if you don't handle that,
then by gosh,
we turn it into raw key downs.
So finally,
your application will get the text data
corresponding to what the user wrote.
For Panther...
We still have Unicode for key and
key down at the end of the chain,
but we've just introduced four
events that let you manage what
happens with ink in your application.
There's an instant mouser event
that lets you decide if some special
region on your document layout
needs to be an instant mouser.
Hopefully there won't be any of those,
but this lets you manage it just in case.
We send an ink point event for
each of the points that comes in
that we think should be inking.
Now, I've talked about instant mousing
and write anywhere and all that.
There's always this decision going on
when a person is using a pen whether
it is supposed to be mousing or inking.
And there's a fair bit of logic.
We queue events up and wait
until they've moved far enough,
soon enough, and to make a decision that,
yeah, they really think they're
inking and all these things,
and they're not in the right
place on the screen and so on.
So we do have all this logic in
place to take care of that for you.
If you install an ink
point event handler,
you will only get these events when we've
already done all that and decided that,
yeah, really, the person thinks they're
writing at this point,
or at least that's our system view
of when they ought to be writing.
So if you want to, for example,
draw your own ink,
you have a calligraphy application
where you want to pay attention to
pen orientation and all these things
and produce really beautiful ink.
Basically,
you can tell us to stop drawing.
Handle the ink point event
and do what you want with it.
And yet,
you'll get the same user interface
for your application as every
other ink aware or non-ink
aware application in the system.
Okay, the Ink Gesture event allows you to
intercept those gestures that Giulia
was showing you so that when you want
to provide targeted gesture support,
you just put in an
Ink Gesture event handler,
and now we'll send you things
when the user has written one
of these special gestures.
Finally, there's the Ink Text event,
and that's what provides that ink text
ref that Giulia described that lets
you provide the correction model with
the alternate word list and so on.
Okay, now I'm going to do a
quick run through the APIs.
This is not the in-depth portion.
You're going to get a really good
walkthrough by Brad Reigel in a minute,
who's going to show you how to actually,
you know, sample code,
show you how to actually use them
in some very specific examples.
This is an attempt to give you a broad
overview so you know what to draw
from and what's possible in addition
to the specifics that you'll see.
Okay, I mentioned those four events.
There they are.
Don't need to go through them again
because we've just talked through them.
There's the instant mouser,
there's the ink point,
there's the ink gesture,
and the ink text.
This is the,
there's only one object in the ink world,
and that is the ink text ref.
And there are a very limited set,
but hopefully fully flexible
set of ink text APIs.
There's,
you can find out how many of those
recognition alternates there are.
There will never be more than five.
You can find out, you can get the
CFString for the top choice,
or the second choice, or third,
or whatever.
You can get, you can hand us a menu ref,
and we will populate it for
you with all those alternates.
So it's very easy to create this.
You can just, in fact,
that'll be an example,
so you'll see that.
You can find out what modifiers,
keyboard modifiers, were held down while
the user was writing.
There may be occasions
where that's useful.
You can grab a copy of a text ref.
You can find out its bounds.
You can draw it into a
rect that you specify.
You can flatten it.
That just means you collapse the
data structures into a contiguous
block of memory into a CFDataRef that
you can write out to disk,
should you want to save
any of these things.
And the counterpart to that is that
you can do a create from CFDataRef.
There are a few Ink state APIs that let
you query the state of the system and set
the state of the system in certain cases.
For example, you can find out that--
I can't even see it, but oh, there we go.
Ink user writing mode.
That lets you find out if the
user has basically turned on that
write anywhere option or not.
And the alternative to write anywhere
is write only in ink-aware applications,
which is what you'll be writing.
The ink set application writing mode,
as opposed to the user writing mode,
allows you to basically tell the system
that you are one of those ink-aware
applications that ink should work in when
the user has turned off write anywhere.
Ink set application recognition mode
lets you control text recognition
versus gesture recognition and
appropriate combinations of those.
Set phrase termination mode allows
you to take control over when
and how phrases are terminated,
including if you want to eliminate R,
handling of it altogether,
and have it only terminate a
phrase when the user presses
an I'm done writing button.
And you'll get an example of that.
And ink is phrase in progress.
Well,
that's important for an API I'm about to
show you that if you think you're going
to handle control terminating the phrase,
well, it's probably best to make sure
there's actually one in progress
before you go terminating it.
And the only public structure
from ink is this ink point.
It contains just three things.
The, the HI point, the location on the
screen where it happened.
It gives you the tablet point rec.
That's defined in carbonevents.h.
It's standard data structure that's
passed up all the way from the tablet,
the tablet driver and on.
And the keyboard modifiers
that were held down.
Basically,
it's everything that we know about the
state under which this ink was written.
There's ink add stroke to current phrase.
Now,
especially if you're a device-specific
solution where you have a bunch of
data that you want to pass all at
once to have recognition performed on,
it doesn't involve the
user writing real time,
you'll probably be adding a stroke
at a time to the current phrase
until your idea of a phrase is done,
at which point you'll call
ink terminate current phrase.
And add stroke to current phrase
just passes an array of ink points.
Okay, with that,
I think I'll hand it over to Brad.
Brad will take you through some specific
examples of applying these things.
Thank you, Larry.
Good afternoon, everyone.
We're going to take a look
at some developer scenarios.
Basically,
we're going to walk through the APIs that
Larry just briefly introduced and see
how we can use some of them in our
applications to go beyond the basic
services that you already get in Jaguar,
allow you to provide more
functionality for your users to
take advantage of their tablets.
We're going to take a look at three basic
applications or three basic scenarios.
First one's going to be text engines,
ways that text engines can take advantage
of the functionality we provide and
make better use of ink services.
Second one is going to be input devices.
These are going to be,
you've got your own
whiteboard or pen or whatever,
and you want to be able to provide
a custom solution for your users
that takes advantage of handwriting
recognition through ink services.
All right.
And the third one is
controlling phrase termination.
It's not really an application,
obviously.
It's applications that wanted to
control when phrases are terminated.
They don't want to use the standard
termination that we have in place.
They may want to do something custom
because of the way that users would
input text into their application,
things along those lines.
I'm not going to go
through in-depth the APIs.
We've actually got full documentation,
believe it or not.
We have two documents.
One's a reference document that
actually goes through all the APIs and
describes all of them in depth.
And we have an overview document
that talks about a lot of what
we're talking about here today.
So first we're going to
take a look at text engines.
In this case,
we're going to look at first
how your text engine can
interact directly with gestures.
So as Giulia showed earlier in Jaguar,
right now you already get
support with gestures,
but only untargeted.
Basically what this means is if the
user were to write a cut gesture,
clear space, things like that,
it only applies to the current selection.
So you can use whatever the
selection is or the insertion point.
So in this case, you'll notice up at
the top of the screen,
we have an example of,
and this actually was done on
InkPad at InkAware application.
You have the cut gesture.
In this case,
you'll notice that the insertion point,
there's no selection.
The insertion point is sitting
down next to the word menu,
but we're actually using the cut gesture
to target cutting the word contextual.
It doesn't matter where the selection is,
where the insertion point is.
Your users can use those gestures
to directly interact with text,
objects, whatever makes sense
for your application.
The bottom of the screen,
you'll see another example,
which is the clear gesture.
In this case, Giulia showed you earlier,
you can write the clear gesture today,
and it simply clears,
deletes whatever the
current selection is.
In this case,
you'll see that the insertion point
is at the end of the phrase there,
but we're actually going to clear,
delete the word recognition right out of
the middle of the phrase using gestures.
So how do you do this?
You do this using the Ink Gesture
Event that Larry referred to.
Ink Gesture Event is
pretty straightforward.
It's only got three parameters.
The first parameter is
just what type of gesture,
what kind.
It could be clear, it could be undo, cut,
copy, paste.
If you look in the Ink Pref pane,
it actually has one of the panels
in there that lists out all
the gestures that we support.
The other two parameters are
the bounds of the gesture.
This is just the global
coordinates on the screen where
the user wrote that gesture.
And the last one is the hotspot.
And we'll take a look at those two and
see how you take advantage of those.
So hotspots and bounds.
You need to pay attention to this in
order to support targeted gestures.
On the upper corner up here,
you've got the cut gesture.
And you'll notice that there's a red
circle around the very beginning point.
Basically,
you write the cut gesture starting
from that bottom point going up.
The hotspot is treated as the
starting point for that gesture.
So when you're interacting with gestures,
you're going to look at that point
to determine what piece of text is
the user trying to interact with,
what object is the user
trying to interact with.
The other corner,
we've got the space gesture.
In this case,
the hotspot is actually the uppermost
point of that upside-down V,
however you want to describe it.
And wherever that point lands is
where you're going to insert a space.
So once again,
as we saw in the screenshot a minute ago,
it doesn't matter where
the insertion point is,
what the selection is.
You can take a look at the gesture and
the hotspot of it and do the right thing.
The bottom of the screen,
we've got the join gesture.
This is one, as Giulia mentioned earlier,
the join gesture is actually
one where it depends upon where
it's written on the screen,
how it's handled.
And in this case,
you want to take a look at
the bounds of the gesture.
There's not a single hotspot.
You take a look at the bounds.
And for this one,
the bounds are the upper
two most corners of,
sorry, the hotspots, really.
That you're looking at are the
upper two points for the bounds.
And you're going to take a look
at those two points and say,
okay, did those land on text?
If so, I want to treat it as a join,
join those two pieces of text together.
If they didn't land on text,
you're actually going to end up returning
event not handled for that gesture.
We'll then turn around and recognize
that gesture as the letter V.
So real quickly,
it's just a standard event handler.
You'll go through and grab the kind,
grab the hotspot, and grab the bounds,
and save those off.
And depending upon which
gesture you've got,
you're going to do things differently.
The undo gesture,
if you're getting that one,
it's not targeted toward anything.
It's just, if you get an undo gesture,
it's just your standard whatever
undoes the last user action.
Currently in Jaguar,
the way we make this work is, in Panther,
if you don't handle these events,
what we actually end up
doing is turning around.
If you don't handle the events,
we turn around, and for undo,
we end up issuing a command U,
or whatever makes sense,
the standard command key
shortcuts for those actions.
So you actually don't
have to handle the undo.
If you don't,
we'll just end up issuing a command U,
assuming that your
application supports that.
So you're walking through,
handling the events.
First one, the undo gesture.
Just call your basic undo routine.
Second one is the cut gesture.
As we just saw,
cut depends upon a hotspot.
So you're going to have some
routine that handles that gesture,
and you're just going
to hand it the hotspot.
And if the hotspot lands on text,
then you want to cut whatever object
or text that gesture lands on top of,
the hotspot lands on top of.
If you determine that the
hotspot lands on text,
then you want to cut whatever object
or text that gesture lands on top of.
If the hotspot landed somewhere outside
of text or not on an object or whatever,
you'll probably want to handle
that as just cutting whatever
the current selection is,
whatever makes sense
for free application.
The join gesture, as we just looked at,
this one you're going
to look at the bounds.
You're going to have a routine that looks
at the upper two points of the bounds,
determines if they land on text,
and if they do,
do the right thing for your application.
And if all that comes back true,
you did handle it and everything.
You just return no error,
and the event's done with.
If you determine that that join
gesture didn't land on top of text,
then you're going to go ahead and
return event not handled error,
like I said before, and we go ahead,
reprocess that, and treat it as letter V.
Thank you.
So second thing we're going to take
a look at is how to implement an
alternates menu for a text engine.
So as you saw earlier,
this already supported in the ink pad,
and it's pretty straightforward,
easy to implement.
Actually, the ink pad in Panther uses our
public API as well and doesn't
do anything special with it.
So in this case,
you've got your text editor, or actually,
this case has to be a text editor,
and you want to support bringing
up a list of alternates for
the word that's been selected.
Usually,
it would be just a contextual menu click
or whatever makes sense on that word.
So how do you do that?
First thing you need to do
is handle the ink text event.
And as we saw earlier,
the ink text event is sent once
we've finished recognition.
The user has written everything they're
going to on the screen for a phrase.
And we issue one ink text event
per word that we recognize.
So if the user wrote hello
world or something like that,
they're going to end up
receiving two ink text events.
And each text event
contains an ink text ref,
which, as we saw earlier,
one of the pieces of information it
contains is the list of alternates,
basically recognition
choices for that word.
And you'll end up...
handling that ink text event.
Go through the first thing for the
ink text event is-- and actually,
it's missing off that last slide--
there's actually one other parameter,
which is, is it a keyboard shortcut?
Because we handle just single letters,
things like that,
and you could be holding down a
modifier key at the same time,
the user could have actually--
can write a command key shortcut
purely using the tablet without
actually using the keyboard.
In most cases for your application,
you're probably not going to
want to treat that as a text.
You're going to want to allow
that to filter through as a
standard command key shortcut.
So first parameter is
just a Boolean that says,
you know, do we believe this is
a command key shortcut,
command or control,
along with a single character?
Assuming it's not,
then you're going to go through and
extract the ink text ref from the event.
You're going to call ink text
create CFString with that text ref.
The zero parameter there just
means it's the topmost choice.
This is the piece of text that
we think the user just wrote.
You're then going to take that CFString.
If your application
doesn't want a CFString,
you can get the data
out of the CFStringRef.
But you're then going to
insert that in your document.
And one of the things you need to do is
when you insert that into your document,
you also need to take a look at the
ink text ref and keep that around.
And you need to associate that ink text
ref with the word that you just inserted.
The reason why is,
as we'll see here in a moment,
we end up using that ink text ref
to create the alternates menu.
So you want to implement
an alternates menu.
One single API does it for you.
Basically,
you're going to create a menu ref.
This could be one that you've already
got laying around that you use.
It's completely up to you
how you want to handle it.
You pass ink insert alternates and
menu and pass this to the ink text ref.
This is why we needed to
keep it in that last step.
That corresponds to that word that the
user is clicking on and your menu ref.
And we then insert,
just like you saw in that screenshot and
like you saw in ink pad demo earlier,
we insert the five alternates and we
actually insert an item that draws the
original ink so that the user then,
say, they look at it and
that's not what I wanted,
but then they look at what they wrote,
oh, that was what I wrote.
They can see it all on the fly there.
So we insert in the menu.
It's up to you then.
You just call pop-up menu select,
contextual menu select,
whatever makes sense
for your application.
And when you're done,
you'll just get the selection
that was made from that menu.
And that's the piece of text that
you should replace in your document.
So say they wrote hello.
It got recognized with a capital H.
They really wanted a
lowercase h at the beginning.
The alternate menu
would contain that item.
If the user selects that,
you go grab that menu item text,
replace the capitalized
version with the opposite,
you know, whatever the user chooses.
And that gives you an alternate menu,
an alternates menu.
A single API along with a couple of the
menu manager routines will do it for you.
Third scenario.
We're going to look at input
devices and how you can create a
custom solution for your users.
And the demo, I have a little demo here.
It's actually pretty,
it's really basic what our demo does,
just for the sake of simplicity.
It could vary a lot for whether
or not you've got a pen or
you could be gathering data
just in a single application.
It varies a lot.
But essentially what you're
going to do is collect the
ink data in your application.
And then you're going to tell
us to perform recognition on it.
And let me show you a demo real
quick here of what I'm talking about.
So we've got a simple application here,
and all it does is it's got an
area in the window here where
it's going to collect data.
And in this case, I'm using a tablet,
but that's just because I'm
used to inputting it that way.
This application, though,
turns off ink recognition.
We don't get in the way at all.
The application itself ends up
collecting the mouse events.
and draws them on the screen.
So you'll see, you know,
this is not the standard black,
all that kind of stuff.
The application is actually
drawing all this on their own.
They're collecting the data and then
they end up sending us that data.
We perform recognition on it.
And just like the standard behavior is,
we end up sending a series
of ink text events and then
you get the text out of that.
So let me show you how we do that.
So first thing you're going to do,
set the recognition state with
ink set application writing mode.
And you're going to tell us,
don't do any recognition.
Don't allow writing with ink
services in your application.
I'm going to handle it all on my own.
For our demo app here, like I said,
for sake of simplicity,
we're just looking at mouse events.
Depending upon your device and such,
you could gather the data in
whatever manner you wanted to.
And as we looked at earlier,
we gather data just
like we do internally.
You're going to want to
gather data into strokes.
And strokes are simply,
as we said earlier,
a basically mouse down, mouse drag,
mouse up sequence defines one stroke.
So you're going to gather data,
and once you've gathered
an entire stroke,
you're just going to call ink add stroke
to current phrase and send us the stroke
along with how many points are in there,
and we start building
up a phrase for you.
You continue doing this,
iterating through for each stroke
that you've gathered data for,
and when you're finished,
you call ink terminate current phrase,
and we go ahead and perform
recognition at that point.
So the code to do it, initial setup.
In this case,
we just have a mouse event handler.
We turn off automatic
recognition for our application.
Don't want Inkwell getting in the way.
And then we just have a
simple mouse event handler.
And as we go through,
we're going to look for
first a mouse down event.
When we see that first one,
we'll go ahead and start
a new array of ink points,
start building that up.
So you get a mouse down,
a series of mouse drag events.
For each mouse drag event,
you're just going to continue
building on your array of ink points.
And when you get a
mouse-up event in our case,
or whatever defines a
stroke for your case,
you'll call inkaddstroke
to current phrase,
send us that array and the
number of points in that array,
and continue on in that loop.
And when you finish gathering the data,
you just call ink
terminate current phrase,
no parameters or anything to it.
We terminate the phrase that you
were sending us the data for.
We perform the recognition,
send a series of ink text events
for each word that we recognized,
and business as usual.
So last scenario we're going to look
at are controlling phrase termination.
This is applications where your user may
be interacting with your application in,
I don't want to say a nonstandard way,
but you want to control
when phrases are terminated.
You want to control when
you're getting the data.
You want the user to be able to
continue writing until the user said,
I'm done with this.
We're going to do this by looking
at the ink point events that we
talked about earlier and by doing
your own custom phrase termination.
So let me show you a quick
demo of that as well.
That will show you.
So in this case, it's just a window.
And we don't do anything special
here except for the fact that we
have an API that says turn off
automatic phrase termination.
So in this case,
the application is in complete control.
And as Giulia was saying earlier,
say the phone rings.
Oh, I want to go answer
the phone or whatever.
Whatever makes sense
for your application.
Notice I've taken the pen away.
I'm waiting a really long time.
No termination is happening.
You're in complete control of it.
The thing you need to keep in mind here
is you're in complete control of it.
The phrase will not get terminated until
your application says to terminate it.
So this ink will stay
here until you finish.
So we have a button
down here at the bottom,
and if I actually clicked on it,
there we go.
And we've terminated the phrase.
Recognition happens.
We send ink text events.
We get the data out of it.
Go along from there, business as usual.
How we do that...
So one step back, as we said,
automatic termination can be turned
off using ink set phrase termination.
Giulia went through earlier when
termination happens normally.
You actually also have
finer grain of control.
You can control so that
termination only doesn't happen
when the pen leaves proximity.
It might only happen,
or you can turn off so it only
doesn't terminate if a timeout
happens or if it takes too long.
And if you turn off
termination altogether,
then you can control termination
through ink terminate current phrase.
So the way we do this,
one of the things you need to keep in
mind is we continue handling all those
mouse events that are coming through.
So normally,
notice we had a button in there
that controlled phrase termination.
Normally,
we're going to continue writing.
Once we've started a phrase,
we don't send anything
through to controls.
We don't do anything.
We can keep sucking all that data
in as further data for writing.
One of the things we talked about
earlier was for each mouse event that
we get through that we've decided,
okay, the user's now inking.
For each mouse event that comes through,
we send an ink point event.
And the ink point event
contains a single parameter,
which is actually the
original mouse event.
And things you can use this for is
controlling whether or not to even
allow inking in a certain region.
Say a phrase is started,
but you don't want to allow
inking outside of a certain
region in your window.
Or in our case,
what we're doing with this
application is you want to,
if a mouse down event
happens in a certain area,
such as on a button or things like that,
you want to do something
special with that.
So if you return event not
handled there for the ink point,
you can just look at it,
see if you want to do anything with it.
If you return event not handled,
we continue on with recognition,
continue sucking all that data in.
If you return no error,
then we basically drop that
and regenerate or repost.
Okay.
So that's the original mouse event.
So if you say you've looked
at an ink point event,
you've determined, okay,
it landed in an area where I don't
want them to treat it as ink.
I want to terminate and start
or just repost as a mouse
event so it gets to my control.
You just return no error
for that ink point event.
So the steps to do it,
ink set phrase termination or
turn off automatic termination.
You've got an ink point event
handler that checks the location
of mouse down events in our case.
If the mouse down lands on
basically the region where that
terminate phrase button is,
and if there's currently
a phrase in session,
then you just call ink
terminate current phrase,
and we finish.
We do recognition,
and you get the ink text events.
Otherwise,
just return event not handled error,
and we continue building up the ink data.
The code to do it is simply
you handle an ink point event.
It's not the k-event ink text
event that shows up in there.
It's actually an ink point event.
You install a handler on it,
and you call ink set phrase
termination and say termination none.
Don't do any automatic termination.
The application is in complete control.
In Point Event Handler,
you're going to grab the
mouse event out of there,
the single parameter.
You're going to check to see,
for our application's purposes,
you're going to check to see,
was that a mouse down event?
If so, check to see, you know, hit test,
where did that event land?
If it landed on the area
where your button is or,
you know,
wherever you're trying to terminate,
then check to see if there's
currently a phrase happening,
you know,
are they actually inking right now?
And if so, terminate the phrase
and return no response.
If there's no error, everything finishes,
we perform recognition.
Otherwise, like I said,
just return event not handled error,
and we continue building up the data.
And that's all you need to do for that.
So summary things to keep in mind.
If you're keeping count,
we have actually less than 20 APIs total.
They're really straightforward.
We put a lot of effort in
making them easy for you to use
without a lot of complexity.
And the Carbon events that we
have basically take advantage
of the current event model.
They're really easy to just flow
into your current event handlers.
And basically,
we just want to encourage you
to add more support to ink,
allow your users to take advantage of
the services that are provided to you,
and ink different.
So we have, as I mentioned earlier,
we have two documents that are
available on the ADC website,
and they're already up there.
One is the Ink Services Reference,
which goes through and actually
documents all these APIs and everything,
and goes into pretty in-depth.
We've got some sample code in there as
well that shows you how to use them.
And also we have an overview document
that shows you how to integrate
ink services into your application,
goes through some of the
samples we've got here.
Review all that and see how
you can take advantage of it.
The application that I was just
using here is called InkSample.
We've also got the code for that posted,
so you can go take a
look at how we do it.
And if you're interested in
more information on how the
recognition technology works,
Larry's got a website.
It's pobox.com slash tilde Larry Y.
And he's got a lot of good
information up there as far as
how the recognition system works.
And if you have further questions,
you can contact Xavier and
send him questions,
feedback.